President Biden signed the Inflation Reduction Act to bring down costs, reduce the deficit, and take aggressive action on climate – all paid for by making sure the largest corporations and billionaire tax cheats finally pay their fair share in taxes.
This historic legislation lowers health care costs for millions of families and allows Medicare to negotiate drug prices for the first time. The Inflation Reduction Act caps seniors’ out-of-pocket spending for prescription drugs at $2,000 per year and ensures no senior on Medicare will pay over $35 per month for insulin. Under the law, 13 million Americans, covered under the Affordable Care Act, will see their health insurance premiums reduced by $800.
The Inflation Reduction Act also takes aggressive action to combat the existential crisis of climate change. These historic clean energy investments will help families save hundreds of dollars every year on their energy bills while strengthening our energy security, creating jobs, and getting us closer to meeting our climate goals.
All of this is paid for by establishing a minimum corporate tax to ensure that the wealthiest corporations finally start to pay their fair share, and cracking down on billionaire tax cheats – without increasing audit rates or raising taxes on those making under $400,000 a year by one cent. President Biden promised to make the government work for working families again and that’s exactly what this law does.
President Biden has long said that it is our sacred obligation to prepare and equip those we send to war and to take care of them and their families when they come home.
As president, he has worked to ensure we make good on this sacred obligation and has signed multiple bipartisan bills to honor and improve care for veterans. 
In his first State of the Union address, President Biden called on Congress to pass legislation to make sure veterans impacted by toxic exposures and their families get the comprehensive care and benefits they earned and deserve. In August of 2022, President Biden signed the PACT Act – the largest single bill to address our service members’ exposure to burn pits and other toxins in American history.
President Biden signed landmark legislation into law that will accelerate semiconductor manufacturing in the United States. The CHIPS and Science Act will help lower the cost of everyday goods, strengthen American manufacturing and innovation, create good-paying jobs, and bolster our national security. 
The CHIPS and Science Act will help us compete with China by bringing manufacturing jobs back to America. The law makes historic investments in research and development to accelerate the industries of the future and advance U.S. technological leadership.
Thanks to President Biden’s Made In America strategy, the United States has created hundreds of thousands of new manufacturing jobs and businesses are investing in new manufacturing lines across the country. The CHIPS and Science Act makes smart investments in manufacturing and research to build on this historic progress and set America up to win the economic competition for the 21st century. 
President Biden brought together Democrats and Republicans to pass the Bipartisan Safer Communities Act, breaking a 30-year streak of federal inaction on gun violence legislation. The legislation took important steps, including requiring people under 21 to undergo enhanced background checks, closing the “boyfriend loophole,” and providing funding to address youth mental health.
President Biden has moved decisively to combat gun violence – issuing dozens of executive orders and signing the most significant gun violence reduction legislation to pass Congress in 30 years.   
President Biden has launched a whole-of-government approach to make our communities safer and issued more executive orders to reduce gun violence in his first year than any other President at the same point in their administration. In July of 2022, Steve Dettelbach, President Biden’s nominee for director of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, became the first Senate-confirmed director of the agency in more than 7 years.
Early on in his administration, President Biden took on the gun lobby to rein in the proliferation of ghost guns. The Biden administration acted to ban the manufacture of ghost gun kits and make it illegal to sell ghost guns without a background check. 
Under the previous administration, confidence in U.S. leadership around the world plummeted to historic lows. Since taking office, President Biden has worked to revitalize our alliances and restore America’s position of leadership on the global stage. 
When Russia launched an unprovoked invasion of Ukraine, President Biden rallied our allies across the globe to ensure Vladimir Putin pays a steep economic price for his unjustified war of aggression. 
Thanks to President Biden’s leadership, international confidence in the United States has sharply increased. America is back, and our alliances are stronger than ever. 

The US Department of Justice — under the Nixon administration, out of all administrations — sued the Trump Management Corporation for violating the Fair Housing Act. Federal officials found evidence that Trump had refused to rent to Black tenants and lied to Black applicants about whether apartments were available, among other accusations. Trump said the federal government was trying to get him to rent to welfare recipients. In the aftermath, he signed an agreement in 1975 agreeing not to discriminate to renters of color without admitting to previous discrimination.
Kip Brown, a former employee at Trump’s Castle, accused another one of Trump’s businesses of discrimination. “When Donald and Ivana came to the casino, the bosses would order all the black people off the floor,” Brown said. “It was the eighties, I was a teenager, but I remember it: They put us all in the back.”
In a controversial case that’s been characterized as a modern-day lynching, four Black teenagers and one Latino teenager — the “Central Park Five” — were accused of attacking and raping a jogger in New York City. Trump immediately took charge in the case, running an ad in local papers demanding, “BRING BACK THE DEATH PENALTY. BRING BACK OUR POLICE!” The teens’ convictions were later vacated after they spent seven to 13 years in prison, and the city paid $41 million in a settlement to the teens. But Trump in October 2016 said he still believes they’re guilty, despite the DNA evidence to the contrary.
A book by John O’Donnell, former president of Trump Plaza Hotel and Casino in Atlantic City, quoted Trump’s criticism of a Black accountant: “Black guys counting my money! I hate it. The only kind of people I want counting my money are short guys that wear yarmulkes every day. … I think that the guy is lazy. And it’s probably not his fault, because laziness is a trait in blacks. It really is, I believe that. It’s not anything they can control.” Trump later said in a 1997 Playboy interview that “the stuff O’Donnell wrote about me is probably true.”
The Trump Plaza Hotel and Casino had to pay a $200,000 fine because it transferred Black and women dealers off tables to accommodate a big-time gambler’s prejudices.
In congressional testimony, Trump said that some Native American reservations operating casinos shouldn’t be allowed because “they don’t look like Indians to me.”
In opposition to a casino proposed by the St. Regis Mohawk tribe, which he saw as a financial threat to his casinos in Atlantic City, Trump secretly ran a series of ads suggesting the tribe had a “record of criminal activity [that] is well documented.”
In season two of The Apprentice, Trump fired Kevin Allen, a Black contestant, for being overeducated. “You’re an unbelievably talented guy in terms of education, and you haven’t done anything,” Trump said on the show. “At some point you have to say, ‘That’s enough.’”
Trump publicly pitched what was essentially The Apprentice: White People vs. Black People. He said he “wasn’t particularly happy” with the most recent season of his show, so he was considering “an idea that is fairly controversial — creating a team of successful African Americans versus a team of successful whites. Whether people like that idea or not, it is somewhat reflective of our very vicious world.”
In 2010, there was a huge national controversy over the “Ground Zero Mosque” — a proposal to build a Muslim community center in Lower Manhattan, near the site of the 9/11 attacks. Trump opposed the project, calling it “insensitive,” and offered to buy out one of the investors in the project. On The Late Show With David Letterman, Trump argued, referring to Muslims, “Well, somebody’s blowing us up. Somebody’s blowing up buildings, and somebody’s doing lots of bad stuff.”
Trump played a big role in pushing false rumors that Obama — the country’s first Black president — was not born in the US. He claimed to send investigators to Hawaii to look into Obama’s birth certificate. Obama later released his birth certificate, calling Trump a “carnival barker.” The research has found a strong correlation between birtherism, as the conspiracy theory is called, and racism. But Trump has reportedly continued pushing this conspiracy theory in private.
While Trump suggested that Obama wasn’t born in the US, he also argued that maybe Obama wasn’t a good enough student to have gotten into Columbia or Harvard Law School, and demanded Obama release his university transcripts. Trump claimed, “I heard he was a terrible student. Terrible. How does a bad student go to Columbia and then to Harvard?”

We’re more than a year-and-a-half into Joe Biden’s presidency, with full second-quarter economic growth numbers from the US Bureau of Economic Analysis now in hand. Which seems like as good a time as any for another installment in my occasional series comparing growth rates under US presidents — which somewhat to my surprise shows Biden on pace to compile by far the best growth record since Bill Clinton.
Yes, this is adjusted for inflation, albeit using the gross domestic product price index, which hasn’t been rising quite as fast as the better-known consumer price index (7.6% year-over-year in the second quarter versus 8.6% for the CPI). And yes, I measure growth here using not GDP alone but the average of GDP and another metric tracked by the BEA, gross domestic income. In theory GDP and GDI should be equal, but they are estimated from different sources and so far this year are showing very different economic trajectories for the US. GDP fell at a 1.6% annualized rate in the first quarter and 0.6% in the second, according to the latest BEA estimates, while GDI rose 1.8% and 1.4%.
There have been a lot of complaints lately that the Biden administration and the media are shifting the goalposts on how recessions are defined by looking past those two consecutive quarters of negative GDP growth to other indicators such as payroll employment, industrial production and real incomes that show continued growth. In reality, the National Bureau of Economic Research has been the semi-official arbiter of when US recessions start and end since well before there was such a thing as GDP, and economists there have continued to focus on data series more frequent and less susceptible to subsequent revision than the quarterly GDP numbers.
By using an average of GDP and GDI to measure economic growth I really am shifting the goalposts, but I think it’s justified. Interest in the metric, which the BEA began mentioning in its quarterly GDP reports in 1998, began picking up in the late 2000s after Jeremy Nalewaik, an economist then at the Federal Reserve Board and now at Goldman Sachs, argued in a 2006 working paper that GDI “has done a better job recognizing the start of recessions” than GDP. The NBER’s Business Cycle Dating Committee first referenced GDI in one of its recession announcements in 2008. In 2013 the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia began reporting what it calls GDPplus, which combines GDP and GDI in a “statistically optimal” way and is currently showing annualized economic growth of 2% in the first quarter of this year and 1.8% in the second. In 2015 the BEA started reporting the simple average of GDP and GDI that I use here. This currently shows growth of 0.1% in the first quarter and 0.4% in the second.
The first GDI estimate for each quarter comes out a month later than the first GDP estimate, and unless that changes it’s hard to imagine GDI or the GDP/GDI average supplanting GDP in public discussion. But economists and economic journalists, myself included, have been giving these measures more and more attention with each passing quarter. Right now, this happens to makes the economic performance of the Biden administration look better than GDP alone does. For whatever it’s worth, it also makes economic growth under his predecessor look better.
Measured by real GDP alone, growth under Biden is 0.6 percentage points slower than by the GDP/GDI average — and 1.3 points below the 4% growth rate for GDI. It’s still the best since the Clinton years. For Donald Trump, the growth hit is smaller but puts him in last place among the presidents listed here. Quarterly GDP data is only available back to 1947, which is why this chart starts with Eisenhower, but annual data show that GDP growth under Trump was the slowest since Herbert Hoover’s less-than-successful presidency.
I wrote a column last year with a headline to that effect, and heard from readers who felt that it was unfair to Trump because he faced the historic bad luck of a once-in-a-century pandemic. It’s true that the pandemic was bad luck, and that US economic performance during Trump’s final year in office actually stacked up well versus other rich countries. But while growth under Trump before the pandemic was a much more respectable 2.6% annualized for GDP and 2.5% for the GDP/GDI average, earlier presidents also faced economic setbacks not of their own making, and without adjusting for those (and I’m not sure how I would do that) it doesn’t seem right to give Trump special treatment in such a comparison. 
Of course, lots can still happen during Biden’s tenure, too. At this point in Trump’s presidency, GDP/GDI growth was 2.8% annualized and GDP growth 3.1%. It slowed after that, even before the pandemic. Whether the US economy falls into recession or not, growth has clearly downshifted this year. So far in the 21st century, US GDP/GDI has grown at a 2% annualized rate and GDP 1.9%. I would guess that the longer Biden is in office, the closer the growth rate will get to those numbers.
Also, economic growth during a president’s time in office is a flawed measure of economic impact. There’s the already-discussed role of luck, the built-in limitations of GDP and similar measures in reflecting how economic rewards are shared and whether they’re sustainable, and the simple fact that policy choices under one president can affect growth well after that president leaves the White House. I can’t adjust for all of those things, but I can at least use several different ways of measuring growth to make clear that no single number is right. Contrasting GDP with the average of GDP and GDI is one approach. Another is to time-shift, starting measurement from the quarter before a president takes office or the quarter after.
For presidents who served two full terms, these shifts don’t change the picture much. For those with very short tenures, such as Gerald Ford and Biden so far, the differences in growth rates can be large — although however you slice it growth so far under Biden remains the fastest since Clinton.
Population growth is an important factor affecting economic growth that, while not entirely outside of a president’s control, seems determined mainly by other forces. Adjust for that by looking at per-capita economic growth, and the picture changes yet again.
This seems quite unfair to Dwight Eisenhower, given that the rapid population growth during his presidency consisted almost entirely of babies who weren’t really in a position yet to contribute much to the economy. But it puts more recent presidents’ economic performance in a justifiably more favorable light. And whaddya know: by this measure, growth under Biden is the fastest since the presidency of Lyndon Johnson.
Again, I wouldn’t make too much of that! But it’s so different from current public perceptions of the economy that it’s worth pausing to understand why that might be.
Consumer prices have risen at a faster pace so far in the Biden presidency than under any president since Jimmy Carter. People really hate inflation. Until it slows, Biden won’t be getting a lot of credit for the pace of economic growth — and bringing it down may require slowing that growth pace even more.